---
layout: post
title: "ME209 - Thermodynamics"
categories: [core courses]
tags: [courses]
image: assets/images/Course Reviews/Core/ce102.png
featured: true
hidden: false
---
  
#### Instructor  
Shivasubraniam Gopalakrishnan  
  
#### Section  
S3  
  
#### Semester  
Autumn '20  
  
#### Course Difficulty  
Course was not very difficult. It is easy to follow if you have a good grip on thermodynamics from JEE.  
  
#### Time Commitment Required  
Low-Medium. Staying regular with lectures helps  
  
#### Grading Policy and Statistics  
Normal. Around 10% AAs, 15% ABs so on  
  
#### Attendence Policy  
None  
  
#### Pre-requisites  
JEE thermodynamics  
  
#### Evaluation Scheme and Weightages  
10% HWs  
25% quiz1/midsem  
25% quiz 2  
40% endsem  
  
#### Topics Covered in the Course  
• Basic concepts and definitions the work interaction  
• The first law, energy and the heat interaction  
• The zeroth law, temperature and scales of temperature  
• Properties of gases and liquids, equations of state  
• The second law, thermodynamic temperature scales and entropy  
• Relations between properties  
• Open thermodynamic systems  
  
#### Teaching Style  
Youtube links to lectures were given and doubt sessions were conducted once a week during class hours.  
  
#### Feedback on Tutorials/Assignments/Projects  
Assignments were medium level. Few were given but took time to solve.  
  
#### Feedback on Exams  
All exams were alike. 40% easy, 40% medium, maybe 1 hard question and 1 question which would require reasoning and out of the box thinking.  
  
#### References Used  
CDEEP lectures by Prof. Gaitonde  
  
#### Interesting relevant links  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Phkjxbw1tQY  
Lectures by Prof. Gaitonde  
The videos are unlisted on youtube, so you can watch them from CDEEP   

*Review By:* A.Vikram