---
layout: post
title:  "ME201 - Solid Mechanics"
categories: [core courses, Second Year]
tags: [courses]
image: assets/images/Course Reviews/Core/me201_parag.png
featured: false
hidden: false
---

#### Instructor
Prof Parag Tandaiya (till midsem, because of a medical issue) & Prof Tanmay K. Bhandakkar (after midsem)

#### Section(S1/S2) and criteria used to allot sections
S1 - by my own choice and it was preferred by students who didn't take any minor as it ran in the minor slot

#### Semester
Autumn '19

#### Course Difficulty
Moderate

#### Time commitment required
Attending class regularly is helpful.

#### Attendance Policy
Not compulsory ; however tutorials were conducted in class and they were a part of the evaluation.

#### Grading Policy and Statistics
80+ AA ,70+ AB so on

#### Prerequisites (also if any skill/knowledge that would be a plus)
Engineering Mechanics (CE102)

####Evaluation Scheme
* Endsem: 40
* Midsem: 25 
* Quizzes: 15 (best 3 out of 4 quizzes) 
* Tutorials: 10 
* Assignment:10

#### Course Contents (in brief)
* Axially loaded members:Statically determinate and indeterminate problems,Thermal stresses
* Bending moment, shear forces and stresses in beams, Singularity function approach
* Equation of equilibrium, Stress transformation, Mohr’s circle, Polar coordinates
* strain-displacement relationship, Strain transformation, Mohr’s circle, Strain
gauges/rosettes, Polar coordinates
* Constitutive Relations: Stress-strain response, Elastic behavior
* Stresses in thin, thick cylinders and rotating discs
* Pure bending, Symmetric cross-section, Curvature, Moment-stress-curvature relationship, Composite beam

#### Mechanism of Instruction and Teaching Style
Prof. Parag writes notes on the board and then explains it explicitly. Sometimes, he relates concepts with experimental examples.

#### Feedback on Tutorials/Assignments/Projects etc
They are based on class notes and the questions are generally from some reference book.

#### Feedback on Exams
Most of the problems are straightforward and based on class notes.

#### Importance of course
This course is a prerequisite for Strength of Materials (ME 202) and would be really helpful for the same.

#### References Used
* S.H. Crandell, M.C. Dahl and S.J. Lardner. An Introduction to the Mechanics of Solids, McGraw Hill Education (India)
Private Limited, Third Edition, 2012.
* F.P. Beer and E.R. Johnston, Jr., J.T. Dewolf, D.F. Mazurek. Mechanics of Materials, Sixth edition, Mcgraw Hill
Education (India) Private Limited, 2013.

#### Anything else you would like to add
This is a really interesting course as it introduces mechanics at the differential level and helps us to understand the consideration of different assumptions in solving mechanics problems.

#### Other interesting links
Nptel course: Solid Mechanics by prof Ajeet kumar (IIT Delhi). He described all the mathematics during the derivation of equations in detail.

*Review by:* Ankit Kumar

