---
layout: post
title:  "Management Minor?"
categories: [minors]
tags: [courses]
image: assets/images/12.jpg
featured: true
hidden: false
---

*Review by:* Dhvaneel Visaria

## Why this minor?
I think it would be good to begin this review, trying to answer an obvious question. Why should one pursue a minor in ‘Management’ in an ‘Engineering’ institute? There are different ways to look at it depending upon your short-term or long-term goals. In terms of  the long-term perspective, management skills are essential for any person - a student, a homemaker, a researcher, a professional or a leader. Therefore being aware of management basics and principles would be very helpful to deal with challenging situations and/or improving one’s effectiveness in performing a particular task. In a broader context, the growing importance of management education in some form for all professionals, especially engineers like us can’t be ignored. Of course these are instances of management in ‘practice’ but unfortunately that is not what you would be learning in the minor. It is then obvious to think, ‘Then why should I do a minor in management?!’ It is the precedence of theory before practice that comes into play. The management minor courses aim to provide introductory exposure to students regarding various facets of management like marketing, strategy, human-resource, operations, finance, etc. And I believe that this learning experience would be thoroughly complete only at the end of the required number of courses.  The profound impact lies in the integration of learning from all the different courses.

## Overview
Okay now that I’ve been talking about the different courses, let me give you some more details about them. The management minor is equally suitable for students from all branches but invariably it attracts many Mechanical Engineering majors. Like the other minors, minimum credit requirements for a management minor degree is 30 i.e. five 6-credit courses from a basket of six courses namely, Marketing Management (MG401), Accounting and Finance (MG403), Strategic Management (MG405), Human Resource Management (MG402), Operations Management (MG404) and Project Management (MG406). The former three courses usually run in odd semesters while the later ones are usually offered in even semesters. With the exception of Strategic Management, there are no prerequisites for these courses. In order to register for Strategic Management, one is expected to finish at least one course from the bracket of other five courses. All these courses are offered in the minor slot and the registration limit is usually 40. 

## Some words of advice ...
Now getting back to the motivation to pursue this minor. I previously talked about the long term perspective but sometimes far-fetched pictures are not very motivating. What about the present? Well, ideally students must pursue a minor to explore a domain that doesn’t intersect with their major but reality is generally driven by ‘peer pressure’. Cometh the sophomore year and all sophies are talking about ‘MINOR’. It’s a fad! And I believe it is okay to be influenced although nothing beats clarity of thought. It is a privilege to have identified your inner calling and if you have, you must go all in for it! But if you’re not very inclined to any particular minor but still want to pursue one, a minor in management can be a handy choice owing to the different dimension it adds in one’s academic profile. Also the fact that management minor courses are very light in terms of commitment required to perform decently, will allow you sufficient time to explore your interests while allaying your peer pressure pangs. If you’re sure of pursuing the non-core career after graduation, this minor is an ideal route to build your profile. But that doesn’t mean that this minor loses relevance for the ones inclined towards research and development or core engineering sectors. A word of caution though would be that this minor should not be assumed to be a substitute for an MBA although it lays a nice foundation to help you decide about grad studies in a business school. 

## How’re the classes going to be?
Coming to the classroom atmosphere, most of the professors are really enthusiastic about their courses. The course curriculum and the lectures are well-planned and structured and usually the entire course plan is handed during the first week of instruction. The students are expected to read the case-studies handed over to them before coming to the classrooms and at times, students are evaluated based on the assigned pre-reading. These case studies are indeed very interesting and the best part of the courses! The atmosphere in the classroom is very different from usual courses with a lot of emphasis on class-participation. Some of the professors even consider class-participation for evaluation and subsequent grading. With surprise quizzes and class-participation considered for evaluation, having good attendance helps a lot in achieving good grades. Most of the courses also have a group project which carries a significant weightage in final evaluation. Looks pretty chill? Yes, it is quite so. 

## Caution!!
But one should be carried away if things are too hunky-dory. Here’s a catch! Unlike most of the other minor courses, management minor courses can’t be later re-tagged as a department or an institute elective. So in case somebody is unable to finish the minor, (s)he might not be able to capitalize upon any good grades achieved in any of the courses. Also, usually the enrollment cap is kept very tight so the CPI cutoff is quite high (you’re safe with 8.5+) and waitlists almost have zero hope. At times, the course content seems too trivial but getting good grades becomes a tough task due to a fairly comprehensive evaluation methodology (predominantly application-based and less rote learning)  adopted by instructors. Based on the reviews of my batchmates, I would suggest anybody who isn’t serious about this minor to at least go for a course on Accounting and Finance . For people who are really serious about this minor, starting with Marketing Management can be a really good idea owing to really amazing professors and relatable course content. One final word of advice for people taking up this minor. There might be times when you may be tempted to think along the lines that most of the things being taught are fairly straight forward and it’s not a big deal. Just hold on for sometime and remind yourself that once you land up in a job or in a corporate setup, these seemingly basic things will prove to be a big deal.



