---
layout: post
title:  "EN 653 - Energy Policy Analysis"
categories: [insti electives]
tags: [courses]
image: assets/images/Course Reviews/Insti/en653.jpg
featured: false
hidden: false
---

#### Instructor:
Prof Rangan Banerjee

#### Motivation to take this course:
Exploration of the public policy space with a focus on technology. It will equip you with the tools to analyse and design a policy intervention. You will be able to assess the government policies towards dealing with climate-change/global warming etc.

#### Sections:
Only one section, not a core course

#### Semester:
Spring '20

#### Course Difficulty:
Moderate

#### Time commitment required:
Moderate

#### Attendance Policy:
Attendance in classes, presentations, computer tutorials is compulsory. To encourage 100% attendance, an incentive of + 5 marks in the in semester will be given for 90%+ attendance, a penalty of -3 marks for attendance between 70-80 % and a penalty of -5 marks for attendance less than 70%.

#### Grading Policy and Statistics:
Relative Grading AA-4; AB-11; BB-13; BC-7

#### Prerequisites:
No pre-reqs (Some overlap in initial course content with EN606, but a small handout is given with relevant content)

#### Evaluation Scheme:
Assignment-10; Course project-30; Midsem Test-10; Weekly Quizzes- 10; Endsem Exam- 40

#### Course Contents (in brief):
The course will provide the tools and techniques necessary for analyzing energy policies. Students will be expected to carry out a project to analyse an existing policy in a specific context or design a policy intervention for a specific goal.
* Overview of energy policy instruments – pricing, regulation, Incentives, subsidies
* Framework for policy analysis, stakeholders, criteria – energy access, security, sustainability,
development
* Case studies of a few energy policies – successes and failures, Free riders and rebound effect
* Reference Energy system, End Use Analysis
* Modelling Energy Demand, Elasticities
* Substitution- S-shaped Logistic curves, Examples of accelerated diffusion- factors affecting diffusion
* Economy wide impacts- Input-Output models, Optimisation models, TIMES-MARKAL
* Scenario generation – approach and examples
* Energy policy analysis project

#### Mechanism of Instruction and Teaching Style
Rangan sir is a very good instructor. He teaches by quoting a lot of real-world and current examples. A great mix of theory, problem-solving and analysis. Sir gives a lot of focus to understanding the numbers that result from calculations - significance, comparison etc. He is patient and clears all doubts well.

#### Feedback on Tutorials/Assignments/Projects etc
Assignment and Project are both group submissions. Project will require significant time commitment over the semester with a couple of interactions with the Prof, TA(s) to discuss progress. Mid-term report has to be submitted as well.
Overall, the different modes of evaluations offer diverse learning outcomes and hence the course is well-designed in that perspective.

#### How strongly would you recommend someone for taking this course?
If you're remotely interested in the policy space with application to tech, definitely would recommend this course.

#### When did you take this course? What will be the ideal semester to take this course? Any other course which can be done before this?
I took the course in my 8th semester. Can be done in any semester.

#### Feedback on Exams:
Quizzes are very-short 5-10 min long. They are directly based on what is taught in class, easy-level questions and do not require any prep as such.
Mid-Sem paper was a little difficult and lengthy. However, every question usually has 4-5 subparts, the first few parts in each are usually easy to answer. In other words, sometimes the solution is just broken down into sub-parts of the question- this makes it easier to solve as the method is indirectly laid out.
End-Sem was not conducted (Due to the semester termination) but can be expected to be similar to the mid-sem

#### Importance of course:
Useful for research in Transportation/Energy policy.

#### References used:
Professor shares relevant articles from time to time. There is some overlap with the EN606 (Energy Resources, Economics and Environment) course offered in the autumn semester- NPTEL videos are available (Rangan Sir only)
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/101/109101171/

#### Other interesting links:
The course will help you make better sense of the discussions below and encourage you to get involved

* [Renewables in Tasmania](https://reneweconomy.com.au/tasmania-sets-world-leading-target-of-200-per-cent-renewables-by-2040/?fbclid=IwAR0oNfkWv7dN013X7AcYVrTILwIqwOz3PfOZZBHHn-EFqFdmNJHynUzirko)
* [Climate Change](http://moef.gov.in/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Draft_EIA_2020.pdf)
* [NDC goals of different countries under Paris Agreement](
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/India%20First/INDIA%20INDC%20TO%20UNFCCC.pdf)

*Review by:* Nishant Jannu
